[WIP] Remove codegen, implement registers for sc-keynodes and sc-agents (#124)
ostis-ai/sc-machine: docs/sc-memory/api/cpp/extended/agents/actions.md

Author: You can use InitiateAndWait method. If you need to use some specific wait condition, you can use `CreateConditionWaiter`.

# **C++ Actions API**

!!! warning
    This documentation is correct for only versions of sc-machine that >= 0.10.0.
--- 

This API provides functionality to handle actions on C++.

## **What is action?**

All actions are processes. Any process is performed by some subject. Each action performed can be interpreted as a process of solving some task, i.e. as a process of achieving the given goal with the given conditions. Each action denotes some transformation carried out in the external environment or in the memory of some system.

Like an agent, an action has a specification. This specification includes: class, arguments, state, result and others. The specification of an action is called a problem (task).

## **ScAction**

The sc-machine provides `ScAction` class to handle actions in sc-memory. You can't call constructors of this class, because they are private. Use `ScAgentContext` to create action with provided class or use the existed one.

```cpp
// Find action class and create action.
...

> ScAction action = context.CreateAction(actionClassAddr);

Author: Examples below change this object, so it is without const

...
```

```cpp
// Or find action and use it.
...
ScAction action = context.UseAction(actionAddr);
...
```

### **GetClass**

To get class of action use this method.

```cpp
...

> ScAddr const & actionClassAddr = action.GetClass();

Author: This method returns semantic action class, not class of state

...
```

### **GetArgument**

> Actions can have arguments. Action arguments are some objects on which this action should be performed. If action has arguments in knowledge base, then you will get them. There are a couple of getters for this.

Author: I think that `on` is more appropriate here.

> Actions can have arguments. Action arguments are some objects on which this action should be performed. If action has arguments in knowledge base, then you will get them. There are a couple of getters for this.

Reviewer: the word 'on' gives me vibes that those objects are being modified

> Actions can have arguments. Action arguments are some objects on which this action should be performed. If action has arguments in knowledge base, then you will get them. There are a couple of getters for this.

Author: Okay

```cpp
...
// Provide relation here if your argument has specific role in action. 
ScAddr const & argAddr = action.GetArgument(ScKeynodes::rrel_1);
// If there is no argument with such role, then `argAddr` will be empty.
...
```

```cpp
...
// Or provide index of argument. 1 is equal to `ScKeynodes::rrel_1`,
// 2 is equal to `ScKeynodes::rrel_2` and etc.
ScAddr const & argAddr = action.GetArgument(1);
// If there is no argument with such role, then `argAddr` will be empty.
...
```

!!! warning

>     This method will throw `utils::ExceptionInvalidParams` if you provide invalid index for argument (for example, 0).

Reviewer: 0 looks like one and only case that throws this exception

Author: There is an upper limit of 20. I will specify it in the documentation.

```cpp
...
ScAddr const & argAddr = action.GetArgument(1, defaultArgumentAddr);
// If there is no argument with such role, then `argAddr` will equal 
// to `defaultArgumentAddr`.
...
```

### **GetArguments**

> You can get all arguments using one getters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can get all arguments using one getter.
```

```cpp
...

> // Here, 2 is number arguments in specified action.

Reviewer: something is wrong with this line

auto const & [argAddr1, argAddr2] = action.GetArguments<2>();
// If action doesn't have some argument, it will be empty.
...
```

```cpp
...

> // You can't ignore some arguments.

Reviewer: can't or can?

auto const & [argAddr1, argAddr2, _] = action.GetArguments<3>();
...
```

!!! note
    `GetArguments` uses `GetArgument` for each argument.

### **SetArgument**

You can set arguments for specified action.

```cpp
...
// Provide relation here if your argument should have specific role in action. 
action.SetArgument(ScKeynodes::rrel_1, argAddr);
...
```

```cpp
...
// Or provide index of argument. 1 is equal to `ScKeynodes::rrel_1`,

> // 2 is equal to `ScKeynodes::rrel_2` and etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// 2 is equal to `ScKeynodes::rrel_2`, etc.
```

action.SetArgument(1, argAddr);
...
```

!!! note

>     If action has already argument with specified role, then connection between action and this argument will be removed and created new one between action and new argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If action already has an argument with specified role, then connection between action and existing argument will be removed and connection between action and new argument will be created.
```

### **SetArguments**

```cpp
...
// Set several arguments simultaneously.
action.SetArguments(argAddr1, argAddr2);
...
```

!!! note
    `SetArguments` uses `SetArgument` for each argument.

### **Action result**

> All action should have result (result situation). Result situation is structure that contains all sc-constructions that which indicate result of interpreting action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All actions should have result (result situation). Result situation is structure that contains all sc-constructions that indicate result of performed(or finished, not interpreted) action.
```

#### **GetResult**

You can result for any actions.

```cpp
...

> // Use this method after that some agent finished 
> // interpreting action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Use this method after some agent finishes 
// performing action.
```

ScStructure const & actionResult = action.GetResult();
...
```

!!! warning

>     You can call this method for finished action only.

Reviewer: why can't I call this method for not finished action?

Author: It prevents a situation where an agent that performs an action is still forming a result for that action, and you haven't waited for it and already want to get result for that action.

Reviewer: I mean I can call it, just an exception will be thrown

Author: Fixed

#### **SetResult**

```cpp
...
// Use this method in agent interpreting action 
// to set new result.
action.SetResult(resultStructure);
...
```

!!! note

>     If action has result, then will be removed and the new one will be set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If action has result, then existing result will be removed and the new one will be set.
```

!!! warning
    You can call this method for not finished, but initiated action only.

#### **FormResult**

> You must not create result structure. You can provide only elements of result for action.

Reviewer: what if I want to set some edge as action result and not structure with this edge?

Author: Action result must be sc-structure

Reviewer: https://ims.ostis.net/ is saying that nrel_result may be a conjunctive or a disjunctive expression as well

Author: It's not valid information. See Standard

Reviewer: https://github.com/ostis-ai/ostis-standard/blob/main/Contents/part_ps/src/sd_agents.tex#L408 is also saying that result is not always an atomic logical formula

Author: Yes. But we're not going to support that now. If necessary, we will add it, but not yet

Reviewer: ok, then change answer on similar question in faq section

Author: Okay

Author: Fixed

```cpp
...
// Use this method in agent interpreting action 
// to form new result with provided sc-elements.
action.FormResult(elementAddr1, elementAddr2);
...
```

!!! note

>     If action has result, then will be removed and the new one will be set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If action has result, then existing result will be removed and the new one will be set.
```

#### **UpdateResult**

```cpp
...
// Use this method in agent interpreting action
// for update existing result by new sc-elements.
action.UpdateResult(elementAddr1, elementAddr2);
...
```

!!! note
    This method updates existing result for action.

!!! note

>     `FormResult` and `UpdateResult` doesn't append sc-element twice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    `FormResult` and `UpdateResult` don't append sc-element twice.
```

!!! note
    If you don't form result then empty result for your action will be generated if you finish action.

### **Action states**

All actions have state. There are three states of actions provided by this API:

* action isn't initiated;

> * action is initiated, but isn't finished, that is, action is performed;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* action is initiated, but isn't finished, that is, action is being performed;
```
also I think that it is possible that action is initiated but it wasn't started because it is still in the events queue(only one thread that processes events and a lot of people are using sc-web)

Author: This is true, but it describes the types of actions according to what methods this API provides.

Reviewer: why is this API returning results that aren't true

Author: IsInitiated() && !IsFinished()

Reviewer: this file introduces action state 'performed' but it is never used as action state in this file, I don't understand why this is needed here at all

* action is finished.

You can initiate, wait or finish actions.

#### **IsInitiated**

Use this method to check that specified action is initiated.

```cpp
...
sc_bool const isActionInitiated = action.IsInitiated();
...
```

#### **InitiateAndWait**

> You can initiate action and wait while it will be finished.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can initiate action and wait for it to finish.
```

```cpp
...
// Provide maximum time of waiting while action will be finished.

> action.InitiateAndWait(100); // milliseconds

Reviewer: what do you think about creating methods like WaitMilliseconds(), WaitSecond() and others so it will be clear what to pass to them

Author: I propose to create `ScTime` class and override this method with parameter of this class. It will more clear and expandable

Author: I'll create issue

// This argument has default value, that equals to 5000 milliseconds.
...
```

#### **Initiate**

Or you can initiate and not wait while it will be finished.

```cpp
...
action.Initiate();
...
```

#### **IsFinished**

Use this method to check that specified action is finished.

```cpp
...
sc_bool const isActionFinished = action.IsFinished();
...
```

> All finished actions should be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All finished actions should be finished with one of the following statuses:
```

* finished successfully;
* finished unsuccessfully;
* finished with error.

#### **IsFinishedSuccessfully**

The set of actions finished successfully includes actions that have been successfully completed from the point of view of subject who performed them, i.e., the goal has been achieved, for example, the solution and result to a problem have been obtained, a construction has been successfully transformed, etc.

```cpp
...
sc_bool const isActionFinishedSuccessfully = action.IsFinishedSuccessfully();
...
```

#### **FinishSuccessfully**

> You can finish successfully action that not finished yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can successfully finish action that has not yet been finished.
```

```cpp
...
ScResult const & result = action.FinishSuccessfully();
// Use result to return result from agent program.
...
```

#### **IsFinishedUnsuccessfully**

> The set of actions finished unsuccessfully includes actions that were not successfully finished from the point of view of subject who performed them for some reasons. There are two main reasons why this situation may occur:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The set of actions finished unsuccessfully includes actions that were not successfully finished from the point of view of subject who performed them for some reason. There are two main reasons why this situation may occur:
```

* corresponding problem is formulated incorrectly;
* formulation of corresponding problem is correct and understandable to the system, but solution of this problem at the current moment cannot be obtained in terms satisfactory from the point of view of executor.

```cpp
...
sc_bool const isActionFinishedUnsuccessfully = action.IsFinishedUnsuccessfully();
...
```

!!! warning

>     You can't finish successfully action that finished or not initiated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You can't successfully finish action that are finished or not initiated.
```

...
```

!!! warning
    You can't finish unsuccessfully action that finished or not initiated.

#### **IsFinishedWithError**

The set of actions finished with error includes actions whose execution was not successfully finished from the point of view of subject who executed them, due to some error, such as incorrect specification of this action or violation of sc-memory integrity by some subject.

```cpp
...
sc_bool const isActionFinishedWithError = action.IsFinishedWithError();
...
```

#### **FinishWithError**

You can finish action with error that not finished yet.

```cpp
...
ScResult const & result = action.FinishWithError();
// Use result to return result from agent program.
...
```

!!! warning
    You can't finish action with error that finished or not initiated.

All these methods return object of `ScResult`. You should return it in agent program. You can't call constructor of `ScResult` to create new object.

--- 

## **Frequently Asked Questions**

<!-- no toc -->
- [What is difference between `ScAction` and `ScEvent`?](#what-is-difference-between-scaction-and-scevent)

### **What is difference between `ScAction` and `ScEvent`?**

> `ScAction` is a class that represents sc-action. A sc-action is a process performed by some entity to accomplish specified problem (task). `ScEvent` represents a sc-event. A sc-event is a connection between process and its initial and result situation. Actions are created after the occurrence of some sc-event and actions are interpreted by agents. Emergence of events in sc-memory leads to generation of new processes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ScAction` is a class that represents sc-action. A sc-action is a process performed by some entity to solve specified problem (task). `ScEvent` represents a sc-event. A sc-event is a connection between process and its initial and result situation. Actions are created after the occurrence of some sc-event and actions are performed by agents. Emergence of events in sc-memory leads to generation of new processes.
```

// Find action class and create action.
...
ScAction action = context.CreateAction(actionClassAddr);
...
```

```cpp
// Or find action and use it.
...
ScAction action = context.UseAction(actionAddr);
...
```

### **GetClass**

To get class of action use this method.

```cpp
...
ScAddr const & actionClassAddr = action.GetClass();
...
```

### **GetArgument**

Actions can have arguments. Action arguments are some objects on which this action should be performed. If action has arguments in knowledge base, then you will get them. There are a couple of getters for this.

```cpp
...
// Provide relation here if your argument has specific role in action. 
ScAddr const & argAddr = action.GetArgument(ScKeynodes::rrel_1);
// If there is no argument with such role, then `argAddr` will be empty.
...
```

```cpp
...
// Or provide index of argument. 1 is equal to `ScKeynodes::rrel_1`,
// 2 is equal to `ScKeynodes::rrel_2` and etc.
ScAddr const & argAddr = action.GetArgument(1);
// If there is no argument with such role, then `argAddr` will be empty.
...
```

!!! note
    There is a limit to the number of order role relations. You can get from `rrel_1` up to and including `rrel_20`.

!!! warning

>     This method will throw `utils::ExceptionInvalidParams` if you provide invalid index for argument (for example, 0 or 20).

Author: see the line above

```cpp
...
ScAddr const & argAddr = action.GetArgument(1, defaultArgumentAddr);
// If there is no argument with such role, then `argAddr` will equal 
// to `defaultArgumentAddr`.
...
```

### **GetArguments**

You can get all arguments using one getter.

```cpp
...
// Here, 2 is number of arguments in specified action.
auto const & [argAddr1, argAddr2] = action.GetArguments<2>();
// If action doesn't have some argument, it will be empty.
...
```

```cpp
...
// You can ignore some arguments.
auto const & [argAddr1, argAddr2, _] = action.GetArguments<3>();
...
```

!!! note

>     `GetArguments` uses `GetArgument` for each argument.

Author: Fixed

### **SetArgument**

You can set arguments for specified action.

```cpp
...
// Provide relation here if your argument should have specific role in action. 
action.SetArgument(ScKeynodes::rrel_1, argAddr);
...
```

```cpp
...
// Or provide index of argument. 1 is equal to `ScKeynodes::rrel_1`,
// 2 is equal to `ScKeynodes::rrel_2`, etc.
action.SetArgument(1, argAddr);
...
```

!!! note
    If action already has an argument with specified role, then connection between action and existing argument will be removed and connection between action and new argument will be created.

### **SetArguments**

```cpp
...
// Set several arguments simultaneously.

> action.SetArguments(argAddr1, argAddr2);

Author: If you want to specify roles, use the `SetArgument`. It uses order relations by default

...
```

!!! note

>     `SetArguments` uses `SetArgument` for each argument.

Author: Fixed

...
```

#### **FinishWithError**

You can finish action with error that not finished yet.

```cpp
...
ScResult const & result = action.FinishWithError();
// Use result to return result from agent program.
...
```

!!! warning
    You can't finish action with error that finished or not initiated.

All these methods return object of `ScResult`. You should return it in agent program. You can't call constructor of `ScResult` to create new object.

--- 

## **Frequently Asked Questions**

<!-- no toc -->
- [What is difference between `ScAction` and `ScEvent`?](#what-is-difference-between-scaction-and-scevent)

### **What is difference between `ScAction` and `ScEvent`?**

`ScAction` is a class that represents sc-action. A sc-action is a process performed by some entity to solve specified problem (task). `ScEvent` represents a sc-event. A sc-event is a connection between process and its initial and result situation. Actions are created after the occurrence of some sc-event and actions are performed by agents. Emergence of events in sc-memory leads to generation of new processes.

### **What if I want to set some edge as action result and not structure with this edge?**

> You're not allowed to do this. Action result must be a sc-structure. Action result is a situation that describes how action was performed. Situation is a sc-structure.

Author: I think we can forbid making the result a non-structure, and if we need to, we can implement and allow it later on.

> You're not allowed to do this. Action result must be a sc-structure. Action result is a situation that describes how action was performed. Situation is a sc-structure.

Author: Either way, it's wrong. According to the description in the Standard, the result is a statement. A statement is a structure

> You're not allowed to do this. Action result must be a sc-structure. Action result is a situation that describes how action was performed. Situation is a sc-structure.

Author: Fixed

# **C++ Actions API**

!!! warning
    This documentation is correct for only versions of sc-machine that >= 0.10.0.
--- 

This API provides functionality to handle sc-actions.

## **What is action?**

All actions are processes. Any process is performed by some subject. Each action can be defined as a process of solving some task, i.e. as a process of achieving the given goal with the given conditions. Each action denotes some transformation carried out in the external environment or in the memory of some system.

Like an agent, an action has a specification. This specification includes: class, arguments, state, result. The specification of an action is called a problem (task).

## **ScAction**

The sc-machine provides `ScAction` class to handle actions in sc-memory. You can't use constructors of this class, because they are private. Use `ScAgentContext` to create action with provided class or use the existing one.

```cpp
// Find action class and create action.
...
ScAction action = context.CreateAction(actionClassAddr);
...
```

```cpp
// Or find action and use it.
...

> ScAction action = context.UseAction(actionAddr);

Author: I propose to name `ConvertToAction`

--- 

## **Frequently Asked Questions**

<!-- no toc -->
- [What is difference between `ScAction` and `ScEvent`?](#what-is-difference-between-scaction-and-scevent)
- [What if I want to set some edge as action result and not structure with this edge?](#what-if-i-want-to-set-some-edge-as-action-result-and-not-structure-with-this-edge)
- [What's the difference between ScSet and ScStructure?](#what-is-difference-between-scaction-and-scevent)

### **What is difference between `ScAction` and `ScEvent`?**

`ScAction` is a class that represents sc-action. A sc-action is a process performed by some entity to solve specified problem (task). `ScEvent` represents a sc-event. A sc-event is a connection between process and its initial and result situation. Actions are created after the occurrence of some sc-event and actions are performed by agents. Emergence of events in sc-memory leads to generation of new processes.

### **What if I want to set some edge as action result and not structure with this edge?**

You're not allowed to do this. Action result must be a sc-structure. Action result is a situation that describes how action was performed. Situation is a sc-structure.

> ### **What's the difference between `ScSet` and `ScStructure`?**

Author: I will move it in docs about ScAgentContext

```cpp
// Or find action and convert it to object of `ScAction` class.
...
ScAction action = context.ConvertToAction(actionAddr);
...
```

<scg src="../images/actions/action_class.gwf"></scg>

### **GetClass**

To get class of action use this method.

```cpp
...
ScAddr const & actionClassAddr = action.GetClass();
...
```

### **GetArgument**

Actions can have arguments. Action arguments are some objects using which this action should be performed. If action has arguments in knowledge base, then you will get them. There are a couple of getters for this.

```cpp
...
// Provide relation here if your argument has specific role in action. 
ScAddr const & argAddr = action.GetArgument(ScKeynodes::rrel_1);
// If there is no argument with such role, then `argAddr` will be empty.
...
```

```cpp
...
// Or provide index of argument. 1 is equal to `ScKeynodes::rrel_1`,
// 2 is equal to `ScKeynodes::rrel_2` and etc.
ScAddr const & argAddr = action.GetArgument(1);
// If there is no argument with such role, then `argAddr` will be empty.
...
```

> <scg src="../images/actions/action_argument.gwf"></scg>

Author: Okay, fixed

```cpp
...
bool const isActionFinishedWithError = action.IsFinishedWithError();
...
```

<scg src="../images/actions/is_action_finished_with_error.gwf"></scg>

#### **FinishWithError**

You can finish action with error that not finished yet.

```cpp
...
ScResult const & result = action.FinishWithError();
// Use result to return result from agent program.
...
```

<scg src="../images/actions/action_finished_with_error.gwf"></scg>

!!! warning
    If you finish action with error that is finished or not initiated, then this method will throw `utils::ExceptionInvalidState`.

All these methods return object of `ScResult`. You should return it in agent program. You can't call constructor of `ScResult` to create new object.

--- 

## **Frequently Asked Questions**

<!-- no toc -->
- [What is difference between `ScAction` and `ScEvent`?](#what-is-difference-between-scaction-and-scevent)
- [What if I want to set some edge as action result and not structure with this edge?](#what-if-i-want-to-set-some-edge-as-action-result-and-not-structure-with-this-edge)

> - [What's the difference between ScSet and ScStructure?](#what-is-difference-between-scaction-and-scevent)

Author: I moved it to sc_agent_context.md
